three-dimensional curved space to be one in which Euclidean geometry is no longer valid. Einstein’s theory, now, says thatThe ...... ..I three-dimensional space is actually curved, and that the ............V ture is caused by the gravitational field of massive bodies. Wherever there is a massive object, e.g. a star or a planet, the space around it is curved and the degree of curvature depends on the mass of the object. And as space can never be separated from time in relativity theory, time as well is affected by the presence of matter, flowing at different rates in different parts of the universe. Einstein’s general theory of relativity thus completely abolishes the concepts of absolute space and time. Not only are all measurements involving space and time relative; the whole structure of space-time depends on the distribution of matter in the universe, and the concept of ‘empty space’ loses its meaning. The mechanistic world view of classical physics was based on the notion of solid bodies moving in empty space. This notion is still valid in the region that has been called the ‘zone of middle dimensions’, that is, in the realm of our daily experience where classical physics continues to be a useful theory. Both concepts-that of empty space and that of solid material bodies-are deeply ingrained in our habits of thought, so it is extremely for us to imagine a physical reality where they do not apply. And yet, this is precisely what modern physics forces us to do when we go beyond the middle dimensions. ‘Empty space’ has lost its meaning in astrophysics and cosmology, the sciences of the universe at large, and the concept of solid objects was shattered by atomic physics, the science of the infinitely small. At the turn of the century, several phenomena connected with the structure of atoms and inexplicable in terms of classical physics were discovered. The first indication that atoms had some structure came from the discovery of X-rays; a new radiation which rapidly found its now well known application in medicine. X-rays, however, are not the only radiation emitted by atoms. Soon after their discovery, other kinds of radiation were discovered which are emitted by the atoms of so-called radioactive substances. The phenomenon of radioactivity gave definite proof of the composite nature of atoms, showing that the atoms of radioactive substances not only emit various types of radiation, but also transform themselves into atoms of completely different substances. Besides being objects of intense study, these phenomena were also used, in most ingenious ways, as new tools to probe deeper into matter than had ever been possible before. Thus Max von Laue used X-rays to study the arrangements of atoms in crystals, and Ernest Rutherford realized that the so-called alpha particles emanating from radioactive substances were high-speed projectiles of subatomic size which could be used to explore the interior of the atom. They could be fired at atoms, and from the way they were deflected one could draw conclusions about the atoms’ structure. When Rutherford bombarded atoms with these alpha particles, he obtained sensational and totally unexpected results. Far from being the hard and solid particles they were believed to be since antiquity, the atoms turned out to consist of vast regions of space in which extremely small particles-the electrons-moved around the nucleus, bound to it by electric forces. It is not easy to get a feeling for the order of magnitude of atoms, so far is it removed from our macroscopic scale. The diameter of an atom is about one hundred millionth of a metre. In order to visualize this diminutive size, imagine an orange blown up to the size of the Earth. The atoms of the orange will then have the size of cherries. Myriads of cherries, tightly packed into a globe of the size of the Earth-that’s a magnified picture of the atoms in an orange. An atom, therefore, is extremely small compared to *The hydrogen atom consists of just one proton and one electron. Once this was perceived, the physicists began to learn to ask the right questions and to avoid contradictions. In the words of Heisenberg, ‘they somehow got into the spirit of the quantum theory’, and finally they found the precise and consistent mathematical formulation of this theory. The concepts of quantum theory were not easy to accept even after their mathematical formulation had been completed. Their effect on the physicists’ imaginations was truly shattering. Rutherford’s experiments had shown that atoms, instead of being hard and indestructible, consisted of vast regions of space in which extremely small particles moved, and now quantum theory made it clear that even these particles were nothing like the solid objects of classical physics. The subatomic units of matter are very abstract entities which have a dual aspect. Depending on how we look at them, they appear sometimes as particles, sometimes as waves; and this dual nature is also exhibited by light which can take the form of electromagnetic waves or of particles. This property of matter and of light is very strange. It seems impossible to accept that something can be, at the same time, a particle-i.e. an entity confined to a very small volume-and a particle a wave a wave, which is spread out over a large region of space. This contradiction gave rise to most of the paradoxes which finally led to the formulation of quantum theory. The whole development started when Max discovered that the energy of heat radiation is not emitted continuously, but appears in the form of ‘energy packets’. Einstein called these energy packets ‘quanta’ and recognized them as a fundamental aspect of nature. He was bold enough to postulate that light and every other form of electromagnetic radiation can appear not only as electromagnetic waves, but also in the form of these quanta. The light quanta, which gave quantum theory its name, have since been accepted as bona fide particles and are now called photons. They are particles of a special kind, however, and always travelling with the speed of light. *The ‘rotation’ of an electron in its orbit must not be understood in the classical sense; it is determined by the shape of the electron wave in terms of the probabilities for the particle’s existence in certain parts of the orbit. task of physicists to understand the structure of nuclei, their .. constituents and the forces which hold them together so ....H tightly. ....Z The first important step towards an understanding of nuclear ............V structure was the discovery of the neutron as the second constituent of the nucleus, a particle which has roughly the same mass as the proton (the first nuclear constituent)-about two thousand times the mass of the electron-but does not carry an electric charge. This discovery not only explained how the nuclei of all chemical elements were built up from protons and neutrons, but also revealed that the nuclear force, which kept these particles so tightly bound within the nucleus, was a completely new phenomenon. It could not be of electromagnetic origin since the neutrons were electrically neutral. Physicists soon realized that they were here confronted with a new force of nature which does not manifest itself anywhere outside the nucleus. An atomic nucleus is about one hundred thousand times smaller than the whole atom and yet it contains almost all of the atom’s mass. This means that matter inside the nucleus must be extremely dense compared to the forms of matter we are used to. Indeed, if the whole human body were compressed to nuclear density it would not take up more space than a pinhead. This high density, however, is not the only unusual property of nuclear matter. Being of the same quantum nature as electrons, the the protons and neutrons are often called-respond to their confinement with high velocities, and since they are squeezed into a much smaller volume their reaction is all the violent. They race about in the nucleus with velocities of about 40,000 miles per second! Nuclear matter is thus a form of matter entirely’different from anything we experience ‘up here’ in our macroscopic environment. We can, perhaps, picture it best as tiny drops of an extremely dense liquid which is boiling and bubbling most fiercely. The essential new aspect of nuclear matter which accounts for all its unusual properties is the strong nuclear force, and the feature that makes this force so unique is its extremely short range. It acts only when the come very near to each other, that is, when their distance is about two to three times their diameter. At such a distance, the nuclear force is strongly attractive, but when the distance becomes less the force becomes strongly repulsive so that the cannot approach each other any closer. In this way, the nuclear force keeps the nucleus in an extremely stable, though extremely dynamic equilibrium. The picture of matter which emerges from the study of atoms and nuclei shows that most of it is concentrated in tiny drops separated by huge distances. In the vast space between the massive and fiercely boiling nuclear drops move the electrons. These constitute only a tiny fraction of the total mass, but give matter its solid aspect and provide the links necessary to build up the molecular structures. They are also involved in the chemical reactions and are responsible for the chemical properties of matter. Nuclear reactions, on the other hand, generally do not occur naturally in this form of matter because the available energies are not high enough to disturb the nuclear equilibrium. This form of matter, however, with its multitude of shapes and textures and its complicated molecular architecture, can exist only under very special conditions, when the temperature is not too high, so that the molecules do not jiggle too much. When the thermal energy increases about a hundredfold, as it does in most stars, all atomic and molecular structures are destroyed. Most of the matter in the universe exists, in fact, in a state which is very different from the one just described. In the centre of the stars exist large accumulations of nuclear matter, and nuclear processes which occur only very rarely on earth predominate there. They are essential for the great variety of stellar phenomena observed in astronomy, most of which arise from a combination of nuclear and gravitational effects. For our planet, the nuclear processes in the centre of the Sun are of particular importance because they furnish the energy which sustains our terrestrial environment. has been one of the great triumphs of modern physics to discover that the constant energy flow from the Sun, our vital link with the world of the very large, is a result of nuclear reactions, of phenomena in the world of the infinitely small. In the history of man’s penetration into this submicroscopic that size are needed to study the world of the infinitely small. They are the supermicroscopes of our time. Most of the particles created in these collisions live for only an extremely short time-much less than a millionth of a second-after which they disintegrate again into protons, neutrons and electrons. In spite of their exceedingly short lifetime, these particles can not only be detected and their properties measured but are actually made to leave tracks which can be photographed! These particle tracks are produced in so-called bubble chambers in a manner similar to the way a jet plane makes a trail in the sky. The actual particles are many orders of magnitude smaller than the bubbles making up the tracks, but from the thickness and curvature of a track physicists can identify the particle that caused it. The picture shows such bubble chamber tracks. The points from which several tracks emanate are points of particle collisions, and the curves are caused by magnetic fields which the experimenters use to identify the particles. The collisions of particles are our main experimental method to study their properties and interactions, and the beautiful lines, spirals and curves traced by the particles in bubble chambers are thus of paramount importance for modern physics. being the Rig Veda. Written in ancient Sanskrit, the sacred language of India, the Vedas have remained the highest religious authority for most sections of Hinduism. In India, any philosophical system that does not accept the authority of the Vedas is considered to be unorthodox. Each of these Vedas consists of several parts which were composed at different periods, probably between and 500 B.C. The oldest parts are sacred hymns and prayers. Subsequent parts deal with sacrificial rituals connected with the hymns, and the last, called the Upanishads, elaborate their philosophical and practical content. The Upanishads contain the essence of Hinduism’s spiritual message. They have guided and inspired India’s greatest minds for the last twenty-five centuries, in accordance with the advice given in their verses : Taking as a bow the great weapon of the One should put upon it an arrow sharpened by meditation. Stretching it with a thought directed to the essence of That, Penetrate that Imperishable as the mark, my friend.’ The masses of the Indian people, however, have received the teachings of Hinduism not through the Upanishads, but through a large number of popular tales, collected in huge epics, which are the basis of the vast and Indian mythology. One of those epics, the Mahabharata, contains India’s favourite religious text, the beautiful spiritual poem of the Bhagavad The as it is commonly called, is a dialogue between the god Krishna and the warrior Arjuna who is in great despair, being forced to combat his own kinsmen in the great family war which forms the main story of the Mahabharata. Krishna, disguised as Arjuna’s charioteer, drives the chariot right between the two armies and in this dramatic setting of the battlefield he starts to reveal to Arjuna the most profound truths of Hinduism. As the god speaks, the realistic of the war between the two families soon fades away and it becomes clear that the battle of Arjuna is the spiritual battle of man, the battle of the warrior in search of enlightenment. Krishna himself advises Arjuna: But the man who knows the relation between the forces of Nature and actions, sees how some forces of Nature work upon other forces of Nature, and becomes not their To be free from the spell of to break the bonds of karma means to realize that all the phenomena we perceive with our senses are part of the same reality. It means to experience, concretely and personally, that everything, including our own self, is Brahman. This experience is called moksha, or ‘liberation’ in Hindu philosophy and it is the very essence of Hinduism. Hinduism holds that there are innumerable ways of liberation. It would never expect all its followers to be able to approach the Divine in the same way and therefore it provides different concepts, rituals and spiritual exercises for different modes of awareness. The fact that many of these concepts or practices are contradictory does not worry the Hindus in the least, because they know that Brahman is beyond concepts and images anyway. From this attitude comes the great tolerance and inclusiveness which is characteristic of Hinduism. The most intellectual school is the Vedanta which is based on the and emphasizes Brahman as a nonpersonal, metaphysical concept, free from any mythological content. In spite of its high philosophical and intellectual level, however, the Vedantist way of liberation is very different from any school of Western philosophy, involving as it does daily meditation and other spiritual exercises to bring about the union with Brahman. Another important and influential method of liberation is known as yoga, a word which means ‘to yoke’, ‘to join’, and which refers to the joining of the individual soul to Brahman. There are several schools, or ‘paths’ of yoga involving some basic physical training and various mental disciplines designed for people of different types and at different spiritual levels. For the common Hindu, the most popular way of approaching the Divine is to worship it in the form of a personal god or goddess, The fertile Indian imagination has created literally thousands of deities which appear in innumerable manifestations. The three most worshipped divinities in India today are Vishnu and the Divine Mother. is one of the .. ..............P .. ....H ...... ..I ............V oldest Indian gods who can assume many forms. He is called Mahesvara, the Great Lord, when he is represented as the personification of the fullness of and he can also impersonate many single aspects of the Divine, his most celebrated appearance being the one as the King of Dancers. As the Cosmic Dancer, is the god of creation and destruction who sustains through his dance the endless rhythm of the universe. Vishnu, too, appears under many guises, one of them being the god Krishna of the Bhagavad In general, Vishnu’s role is that of the preserver of the universe. The third divinity of this triad is Shakti, the Divine Mother, the archetypal goddess representing in her many forms the female energy of the universe. Shakti also appears as wife and the two are often shown in passionate embraces in magnificent temple sculptures which radiate an extraordinary sensuousness of a degree completely unknown in any Western religious art. Contrary ..R most Western religions, sensuous pleasure has never been suppressed in Hinduism, because the body has always been considered to be an integral part of the human being and not separated from the spirit. The Hindu, therefore, does not try to control the desires of the body by the conscious will, but aims at realizing himself with his whole being, body and mind. Hinduism has even developed a branch, the medieval Tantrism, where enlightenment is sought through a profound experience of sensual love ‘in which each is both’, in accordance with the words of the As a man, when in the embrace of a beloved wife, knows nothing within or without, so this person, when in the embrace of the intelligent Soul, knows nothing within or was closely associated with this medieval form of erotic mysticism, and so were Shaktiand numerous other female deities which exist in great numbers in Hindu mythology. This abundance of goddesses shows again that in Hinduism the physical and sensuous side of human nature, which has always been associated with the female, is a fully integrated part of the Divine. Hindu goddesses are not shown as holy virgins, Suzuki has called the ‘two pillars supporting the great edifice of Buddhism’. They are prajna, which is transcendental wisdom, or intuitive intelligence, and which is love or corn-passion. Accordingly, the essential nature of all things is described in Mahayana Buddhism not only by the abstract metaphysical terms and Void, but also by the term Dharmakaya, the ‘Body of Being’, which describes reality as it appears to the Buddhist’s religious consciousness. The Dharmakaya is similar to the in Hinduism. It pervades all material things in the universe and is also reflected in the human mind as the enlightened wisdom. It is thus spiritual and material at the same time. The emphasis on love and compassion as essential parts of wisdom has found its strongest expression in the ideal of the Bodhisattva, one of the characteristic developments of Mahayana Buddhism. A Bodhisattva is a highly evolved human being on the way to becoming a Buddha, who is not seeking enlightenment for himself alone, but has vowed to help all other beings achieve Buddhahood before he enters into nirvana. The origin of this idea lies in the decision of the Buddha-presented in Buddhist tradition as a conscious and not at all easy not simply to enter nirvana, but to return to the world in order to show the path to salvation to his fellow human beings. The Bodhisattva ideal is also consistent with the Buddhist doctrine of non-ego, because if there is no separate individual self, the idea of one individual entering nirvana alone obviously does not make much sense. The element of faith, finally, is emphasized in the so-called Pure Land school of Mahayana Buddhism. The basis of this school is the Buddhist doctrine that the original nature of all human beings is that of a Buddha, and it holds that in order to enter nirvana, or the ‘Pure Land’, all one has to do is to have faith in one’s original Buddha nature. The culmination of Buddhist thought has been reached, according to many authors, in the so-called Avatamsaka school which is based on the sutra of the same name. This sutra is regarded as the core of Mahayana Buddhism and is praised by Suzuki in the most enthusiastic words: their properties and interactions is the principal aim of modern fundamental physics. We know today over two hundred particles, most of them being created artificially in collision processes and living only an extremely short time; far less than a millionth of a second! It is thus quite obvious that these short-lived particles represent merely transitory patterns of dynamic processes. The main questions with regard to these patterns, or particles, are the following. What are their distinguishing features? Are they composite and, if so, what do they consist of or-better-what other patterns do they involve? How do they interact with one another, i.e. what are the forces between them? Lastly, if the particles themselves are processes, what kind of processes are they? We have become aware that in particle physics all these questions are inseparably connected. Because of the relativistic nature of subatomic particles, we cannot understand their properties without understanding their mutual interactions, and because of the interconnectedness of the subatomic world we shall not understand any one particle before understanding all the others. The following chapters will show how far we have come in understanding the particles’ properties and interactions. Although we are still lacking a complete quantum-relativistic theory of the subatomic world, several partial theories and models have been developed which describe some aspects of this world very successfully. A discussion of the most important of these models and theories will show that they all involve philosophical conceptions which are in striking agreement with those in Eastern mysticism. over the surface.* It is interesting to note that physicists have .... used the same analogy in the context of field theory to point ..................out the illusion of a material substance created by a moving ......particle. Thus Weyl writes: ......P According to the Field theory of matter1 a material particle such as an electron is merely a small domain of the electrical field within which the field strength assumes enormously high values, indicating that a comparatively huge field energy is concentrated in a very small space. Such an energy knot, which by no means is clearly delineated against the remaining field, propagates through empty space like a water wave across the surface of a lake; there is no such thing as one and the same substance of which the electron consists at all In Chinese philosophy, the field idea is not only implicit in the notion of the Tao as being empty and formless, and yet producing all forms, but is also expressed explicitly in the concept of ch’i. This term played an important role in almost every Chinese school of natural philosophy and was particularly important in Neo-Confucianism; the school which attempted a synthesis of Confucianism, Buddhism and word ch’i literally means ‘gas’ or ‘ether’, and was used in ancient China to denote the vital breath or energy animating the cosmos. In the human body, the ‘pathways of are the basis of traditional Chinese medicine. The aim of acupuncture is to stimulate the flow of ch’i through these channels. The flow of ch’i is also the basis of the flowing movements of the Taoist dance of the warrior. The Neo-Confucians developed a notion of ch’i which bears the most striking resemblance to the concept of the quantum field in modern physics. Like the quantum field, ch’i is conceived as a tenuous and non-perceptible form of matter which is present throughout space and can condense into solid objects. In the words of Chang Tsai: as indestructible objects, but rather as dynamic patterns involving a certain amount of energy which can be redistributed when new patterns are formed. The creation of a massive particle is only possible when the energy corresponding to its mass is provided, for example, in a collision process. In the case of the strong interactions, this energy is not always available, as when two interact with one another in an atomic nucleus. In such cases, the exchange of massive mesons should therefore not be possible. Yet, these exchanges do take place. Two protons, for example, may exchange a ‘pi-meson’, or whose mass is about one seventh of the proton mass: exchange of a between two protons(p) of time which one could call a ‘particle second’.* To cross a medium-sized atomic nucleus, a particle needs about ten of these ‘particle seconds’ if it travels at a speed close to the speed of light, as particles do in the collision experiments. Among the great number of unstable particles, there are about two dozen which can travel across at least ‘It should be noted that the possibilities are not completely arbitrary, but are restricted by several general laws to be discussed in the subsequent chapter. A New Koan? The subatomic world is one of rhythm, movement and continual change. It is not, however, arbitrary and chaotic, but follows very definite and clear patterns. To begin with, all particles of a given kind are completely identical; they have exactly the same mass, electric charge, and other characteristic properties. Furthermore, all charged particles carry electric charges exactly equal (or opposite) to that of the electron, or charges of exactly twicethat amount. The same is true of other quantities that are characteristic attributes of the particles; they do not take arbitrary values but are restricted to a limited number, which allows us to arrange the particles into a few distinct groups, or ‘families’. This leads to the question of how these definite patterns arise in the dynamic and ever-changing particle world, The emergence of clear patterns in the structure of matter is not a new phenomenon, but was already observed in the world of atoms. Like subatomic particles, atoms of a given kind are completely identical and the different kinds of atoms, of chemical elements, have been arranged into several groups in the periodic table. This classification is now well understood; it is based on the number of protons and neutrons present in the atomic nuclei and on the distribution of the electrons in spherical orbits, or ‘shells’, around the nuclei. As discussed previously,* the wave nature of the electrons restricts the mutual distance of their orbits and the amount of rotation an electron can have in a given orbit to a few values corresponding to specific vibrations of the electron waves. common case of symmetry is associated with mirror reflection; a figure is said to be symmetric when you can draw a line through it and thereby divide it into two parts which are exact mirror images of each other. Higher degrees of symmetry are exhibited by patterns which allow several lines of symmetry to be drawn, like the following pattern used in Buddhist symbolism. Reflection, however, is not the only operation associated with symmetry. A figure is also said to be symmetric if it looks the It is surprising that most of these regularities can be represented in a very simple way if one assumes that all hadrons are made of a small number of elementary entities which have so far eluded direct observation. These entities have been given the fanciful name ‘quarks’ by Murray Cell-Mann who referred his fellow physicists to the line in James Joyce’s Finnegan’s Wake, ‘Three quarks for Muster Mark’, when he postulated their existence. Cell-Mann succeeded in accounting for a large number of patterns, such as the octets and the decuplet discussed above, by assigning appropriate quantum numbers to his three quarks and their antiquarks, and then putting these building blocks together in various combinations to form baryons and mesons whose quantum numbers are obtained simply by adding those of their constituent quarks. In this sense, baryons can be said to ‘consist of’ three quarks, their antiparticles of the corresponding antiquarks, and mesons of a quark plus an antiquark. The simplicity and efficiency of this model is striking, but it leads to severe difficulties if quarks are taken seriously as actual physical constituents of hadrons. So far, no hadrons have ever been broken up into their constituent quarks, in spite of bombarding them with the highest energies available, which means that quarks have to be held together by extremely strong binding forces. According to our present understanding of particles and their interactions, these forces can only manifest themselves through the exchange of other particles, and consequently these other particles, too, would be present inside each If this were so, however, they would also contribute to the properties and thus destroy the simple additive scheme of the quark model. In other words, if quarks are held together by strong interaction forces, these must involve other particles and the quarks must consequently show some kind of ‘structure’, just like all the other strongly interacting particles. For the quark model, however, it is essential to have pointlike, structureless quarks. Because of this fundamental difficulty, it has so far not been possible to formulate the quark model in a consistent dynamic way which accounts for the symmetries and for the binding forces. On the experimental side, there has been a fierce but, so .... ........N ..................V far, unsuccessful ‘hunt for the quark over the past decade. If single quarks exist, they should be quite conspicuous because....H ...... ..I Cell-Mann’s model requires them to possess some very unusual ............V properties, like electric charges of and of that of the electron, which do not appear anywhere in the particle world. So far, no particles with these properties have been observed in spite of the most intensive search. This persistent failure to detect them experimentally, plus the serious theoretical objections to their existence, have made the reality of quarks extremely doubtful. On the other hand, the quark model continues to be very successful in accounting for the regularities found in the particle world, although it is no longer used in its original simple form. In Cell-Mann’s original model, all hadrons could be built from three kinds of quarks and their antiquarks, but in the mean time physicists have had to postulate additional quarks to account for the great variety of patterns. Cell-Mann himself recently proposed that each quark can appear in three different varieties which he called-most appropriately in a lecture in Paris-‘red, white, and blue quarks’. This increased the total number of quarks to nine, and since then three more quarks have been postulated,* which allowed one of the speakers at a recent physics conference to refer to them facetiously as ‘the twelve observed quarks’. The great number of regularities that can be successfully described in terms of these twelve quarks is truly impressive. There can be no doubt that hadrons exhibit ‘quark symmetries’, even though our present understanding of particles and interactions precludes the existence of physical quarks. At present, in the summer of 1974, the paradoxes surrounding the quark model are becoming increasingly sharp. A great deal of experimental data support the quark model; others contradict it violently. No one has ever seen a quark, and according ‘to our basic ideas about particle interactions quarks cannot exist. Yet, hadrons very often behave exactly as if they consisted of pointlike elementary constituents. This situation is strongly reminiscent of the early days of atomic physics when equally striking paradoxes led the physicists to a major breakthrough but only with those of its parts, or ‘elements’, which refer to the processes under consideration. These are represented symbolically by diagrams like the one above which pictures one of the simplest and most general particle reactions: two particles, A ........B, undergo a collision to emerge as two different particles, C and D. More complicated processes involve a greater number of particles and are represented by diagrams like the following. .... its self-consistency, with its components being consistent both with one another and with themselves. This idea has arisen inThe ...... ..I the context of S-matrix theory and is known as the ‘bootstrap’ ............V hypothesis. Its originator and main advocate is Geoffrey Chew who, on the one hand, has developed the idea into a general ‘bootstrap’ philosophy of nature and, on the other, has used it (in collaboration with other physicists) to construct specific models of particles formulated in S-matrix language. Chew has described the bootstrap hypothesis in several articles’ which provide the basis for the following presentation. The bootstrap philosophy constitutes the final rejection of the mechanistic world view in modern physics. Newton’s universe was constructed from a set of basic entities with certain fundamental properties, which had been created by God and thus were not amenable to further analysis. In one way or another, this notion was implicit in all theories of natural science until the bootstrap hypothesis stated explicitly that the world cannot be understood as an assemblage of entities which cannot be analysed further. In the new world view, the universe is seen as a dynamic web of interrelated events. None of the properties of any part of this web is fundamental; they all follow from the properties of the other parts, and the overall consistency of their mutual interrelations determines the structure of the entire web. Thus, the bootstrap philosophy represents the culmination of a view of nature that arose in quantum theory with the realization of an essential and universal interrelationship, acquired its dynamic content in relativity theory, and was formulated in terms of reaction probabilities in S-matrix theory. At the same time, this view of nature came ever closer to the Eastern world view and is now in harmony with Eastern thought, both in its general philosophy and in its specific picture of matter. The bootstrap hypothesis not only denies the existence of fundamental constituents of matter, but accepts no fundamental entities whatsoever-no fundamental laws, equations or principles-and thus abandons another idea which has been an essential part of natural science for hundreds of years. The notion of fundamental laws of nature was derived from the belief in a divine lawgiver which was deeply rooted in the Judaeo-Christian tradition. In the words of Thomas Aquinas: There is a certain Eternal Law, to wit, Reason, existing in the mind of Cod and governing the whole universe.* This notion of an eternal, divine law of nature greatly influenced Western philosophy and science. Descartes wrote about the ‘laws which Cod has put into nature’, and Newton believed that the highest aim of his scientific work was to give evidence of the ‘laws impressed upon nature by Cod’. To discover the ultimate fundamental laws of nature remained the aim of natural the three centuries following Newton. In modern physics, a very different attitude has now developed. Physicists have come to see that all their theories of natural phenomena, including the ‘laws’ they describe, are creations of the human mind; properties of our conceptual map of reality, rather than of reality itself. This conceptual scheme is necessarily limited and approximate,* as are all the scientific theories and ‘laws of nature’ it contains. All natural phenomena are ultimately interconnected, and in order to explain any one of them we need to understand all the others, which is obviously impossible. What makes science so successful is the discovery that approximations are possible. If one is satisfied with an approximate ‘understanding’ of nature, one can describe selected groups of phenomena in this way, neglecting other phenomena which are less relevant. Thus one can explain many phenomena in terms of a few, and consequently understand different aspects of nature in an approximate way without having to understand everything at once. This is the scientific method; all scientific theories and models are approximations to the true nature of things, but the error involved in the approximation is often small enough to make such an approach meaningful. In particle physics, for example, the gravitational interaction forces between particles are usually ignored, as they are many orders of magnitude weaker than those of the other interactions. Although the error caused by this omission is exceedingly small, it is clear that the gravitational interactions will have to be included in future, more accurate theories of particles. Thus physicists construct a sequence of partial and is ‘law’ implicit in it, but this law is the law to which parts of wholes have to conform by virtue of their very existence as parts of wholes . . . The most important thing about parts is that they have to fit precisely into place with the other parts in the whole organism which they It is easy to see how such a view led the Chinese thinkers to the idea which has only recently been developed in modern physics, that self-consistency is the essence of all laws of nature. The following passage by Ch’en Shun, an immediate pupil of Chu Hsi who lived around A.D. 1200, gives a very clear account of this idea in words which could be taken as a perfect explanation of the notion of self-consistency in the bootstrap philosophy: is a natural and unescapable law of affairs and things . . . The meaning of ‘natural and unescapable’ is that (human) affairs and (natural) things are made just exactly to fit into place. The meaning of ‘law’ is that the fitting into place occurs without the slightest excess or deficiency . . . The men of old, investigating things to the utmost, and searching out wanted to elucidate the natural unescapableness of (human) affairs and (natural) things, and this simply means that what they were looking for was all the exact places where things precisely fit together. Just In the Eastern view then, as in the view of modern physics, everything in the universe is connected to everything else and no part of it is fundamental. The properties of any part are determined, not by some fundamental law, but by the properties of all the other parts. Both physicists and mystics realize the resulting impossibility of fully explaining any phenomenon, but then they take different attitudes. Physicists, as discussed before, are satisfied with an approximate understanding of nature. The Eastern mystics, on the other hand, are not interested in approximate, or ‘relative’ knowledge. They are concerned with ‘absolute’ knowledge involving an understanding of the totality of Life. Being well aware of the essential interrelationship of the universe, they realize that to explain something means, ultimately, to show how it is connected to everything else. As this is impossible, the Eastern mystics insist that no single phenomenon can be explained. Thus Ashvaghosha: All things in their fundamental nature are not namable .... or explicable. They cannot be adequately expresssed in any form of ................................Q The Eastern sages, therefore, are generally not interested in explaining things, but rather in obtaining a direct non-intellectual experience of the unity of all things. This was the attitude of the Buddha who answered all questions about life’s meaning, the origin of the world, or the nature of nirvana, with a ‘noble silence’. The nonsensical answers of Zen masters, when asked to explain something, seem to have the same purpose; to make the student realize that everything is a consequence of all the rest; that ‘explaining’ nature just means to show its unity; that, ultimately, there is nothing to explain. When a monk asked Tozan, who was weighing some flax, What is Buddha? Tozan said, This flax weighs three and when was asked why Bodhidharma came to China, he replied, ‘An oak tree in the garden.‘” To free the human mind from words and explanations is one of the main aims of Eastern mysticism. Both Buddhists and Taoists speak of a ‘network of words’, or a ‘net of concepts’, thus extending the idea of the interconnected web to the realm of the intellect. As long as we try to explain things, we are bound by karma: trapped in our conceptual network. To transcend words and explanations means to break the bonds of karma and attain liberation. The world view of the Eastern mystics shares with the bootstrap philosophy of modern physics not only an emphasis on the mutual interrelation and self-consistency of all phenomena, but also the denial of fundamental constituents of matter. In a universe which is an inseparable whole and where all forms are fluid and ever-changing, there is no room for any fixed fundamental entity. The notion of ‘basic building blocks’ of matter is therefore generally not encountered in Eastern thought. Atomic theories of matter have never been developed in Chinese thought, and although they have arisen in some schools of Indian philosophy, they are rather peripheral to Indian mysticism. In Hinduism, the notion of atoms is prominent in the system (which is regarded as unorthodox since it does not accept the authority of the In Buddhist .... sophy, atomic theories have arisen in two schools of Hinayana Buddhism, but are treated as illusory products of avidya by the....H ...... ..I more important Mahayana branch. Thus Ashvaghosha states: ............V When we divide some gross (or composite) matter, we can reduce it to atoms. But as the atom will also be subject to further division, all forms of material existence, whether gross or fine, are nothing but the shadow of and we cannot ascribe any degree of (absolute or independent) reality to The principal schools of Eastern mysticism thus agree with the view of the bootstrap philosophy that the universe is an interconnected whole in which no part is any more fundamental than the other, so that the properties of any one part are determined by those of all the others. In that sense, one might say that every part ‘contains’ all the others and, indeed, a vision of mutual embodiment seems to be characteristic of the mystical experience of nature. In the words of Sri Aurobindo, Nothing to the supramental sense is really finite; it is founded on a feeling of all in each and of each in This notion of ‘all in each and each in all’ has found its most extensive elaboration in the Avatamsaka school of Mahayana Buddhism* which is often considered to be the final culmination of Buddhist thought. It is based on the Avatamsaka traditionally believed to have been delivered by the Buddha while he was in deep meditation after his Awakening. This voluminous which has so far not been translated into any Western language, describes in great detail how the world is perceived in the enlightened state of consciousness, when ‘the solid outlines of individuality melt away and the feeling of finiteness no longer oppresses In its last part, called it tells the story of a young pilgrim, Sudhana, and gives the most vivid account of his mystical experience of the universe, which appears to him as a perfect network of mutual relations, where all things and events interact with each other in such a way that each of them contains, in itself, *See scientific bootstrap theory. Nevertheless, there are models of subatomic particles in modern physics, based on the bootstrapThe ...... ..I hypothesis, which show the most striking parallels to the views ............V of Mahayana Buddhism. When the bootstrap idea is formulated in a scientific context, it has to be limited and approximate, and its main approximation consists in neglecting all but the strong interactions. Since these interaction forces are about a hundred times stronger than the electromagnetic ones, and many more orders of magnitude stronger than weak and gravitational interactions, such an approximation seems reasonable. The scientific bootstrap, then, deals exclusively with strongly interacting particles, or hadrons, and is therefore often called the bootstrap’. It is formulated in the framework of S-matrix theory and its aim is to derive all properties of hadrons and their interactions uniquely from the requirement of self-consistency. The only ‘fundamental laws’ accepted are the general S-matrix principles discussed in the previous chapter, which are required by our methods of observation and measurement and thus constitute the unquestioned framework necessary for all science. Other properties of the S matrix may have to be postulated temporarily as ‘fundamental principles’, but will be expected to emerge as a necessary consequence of self-consistency in the complete theory. The postulate that all hadrons form sequences described by the formalism* may he of that kind. In the language of S-matrix theory, then, the bootstrap hypothesis suggests that the full S matrix, and thus all the properties of hadrons, can be determined uniquely from the general principles because there is only one possible S matrix consistent with all three of them. This conjecture receives support from the fact that physicists have never come close to constructing a mathematical model which satisfies the three general principles. If the only consistent S matrix is the one describing properties and interactions of hadrons, as the bootstrap hypothesis assumes, the physicists’ failure to construct a-consistent partial S matrix becomes understandable. The phenomena involving hadrons are so complex that it is .... by no means certain whether the complete self-consistent S matrix will ever be constructed, but one can envisage a series of partially successful models of smaller scope. Each of them would be intended to cover only a part of physics and would therefore contain some unexplained parameters representing its limitations, but the parameters of one model may be explained by another. Thus more and more phenomena may gradually be covered with ever-increasing accuracy by a mosaic of interlocking models whose net number of unexplained parameters will keep decreasing. The adjective ‘bootstrap’ is thus never appropriate for any individual model, but can only be applied to a combination of mutually consistent models, none of which is any more fundamental than the others. As Chew has put it, ‘A physicist who is able to view any number of different partially successful models without favoritism is automatically a A number of partial models of that kind already exist, formulated in S-matrix language and describing certain aspects of phenomena. The most successful of them are the so-called ‘dual models’ which make extensive use of the dual description of reactions in terms of direct and cross channels.* These models incorporate, for the first time, two of the three general principles** plus the crossing property of the matrix and the formalism. They constitute so far the most promising attempts at carrying out the bootstrap programme. The picture of hadrons which emerges from these bootstrap models is often summed up in the provocative phrase, ‘every particle consists of all other particles’. It must not be imagined, however, that each contains all the others in a classical, static sense. Rather than ‘containing’ one another, hadrons ‘involve’ one another in the dynamic and probabilistic sense of S-matrix theory, each being a potential ‘bound state’ of all sets of particles which may interact with one another to form the under consideration.*** In that sense, all hadrons are composite structures whose components are again hadrons, and none of them is any more elementary than the others. The binding forces holding the structures togethermanifest themselves through the exchange of particles, and these exchanged particles are again hadrons. Each therefore, plays three roles: it is a composite structure, it may be a constituent of another and it may be exchanged between constituents and thus constitute part of the forces holding a structure together. The concept of ‘crossing’ is crucial for this picture. Each is held together by forces associated with the exchange of other hadrons in the cross channel, each of which is, in turn, held together by forces to which the first makes a contribution. Thus, ‘each particle helps to generate other particles, which in turn generate The whole set of hadrons generates itself in this way or pulls itself up, so to say, by its ‘bootstraps’. The idea, then, is that this extremely complex bootstrap mechanism is self-determining, that is, that there is only one way in which it can be achieved. In other words, there is only one possible self-consistent set of hadrons-the one found in nature. In the bootstrap, all particles are dynamically composed of one another in a self-consistent way, and in that sense can be said to ‘contain’ one another. In Mahayana Buddhism, a very similar notion is applied to the whole universe. This cosmic network of interpenetrating things and events is illustrated in the by the metaphor of Indra’s net, a vast network of precious gems hanging over the palace of the god Indra. In the words of Sir Charles Eliot: In the heaven of Indra, there is said to be a network of pearls, so arranged that if you look at one you see all the others reflected in it. In the same way each object in the world is not merely itself but involves every other object and in fact is everything else. ‘In every particle of dust, there are present Buddhas without The similarity of this image with that of the bootstrap is indeed striking. The metaphor of Indra’s net may justly be called the first bootstrap model, created by the Eastern sages some 2,500 years before the beginning of particle physics. . Buddhists insist that the concept of interpenetration is not comprehensible intellectually, but is to be experienced by an enlightened mind in the state of meditation. Thus D. T. Suzuki writes : The Buddha [in the ..is no more the one who is living in the world conceivable in space and time. His consciousness is not that of an ordinary mind which must be regulated according to the senses and logic . . . The Buddha of the ..lives in a spiritual world which has its own rules.19 In modern physics, the situation is quite similar. The idea of every particle containing all the others is inconceivable in ordinary space and time. It describes a reality like the one of the Buddha, has its own rules. In the case of the bootstrap, they are the rules of quantum theory and relativity theory, the key concept being that the forces holding particles together are themselves particles exchanged in the cross channels. This concept can be given a precise mathematical meaning, but is almost impossible to visualize. It is a specifically relativistic feature of the bootstrap, and since we have no direct experience of the four-dimensional world of space-time, it is extremely difficult to imagine how a single particle can contain all other particles and at the same time be part of each of them. This, however, is exactly the view of the Mahayana: When the one is set against all the others, the one is seen as pervading them all and at the same time embracing them all in itself.” The idea of each particle containing all the others has not only arisen in Eastern mysticism, but also in Western mystical thought. It is implicit, for example, in William Blake’s famous lines : To see a world in a grain of sand And a heaven in a wild flower, Hold infinity in the palm of your hand, And eternity in an hour. 298 Here again, a mystical vision has led to an image of the strap type; if the poet sees the world in a grain of sand, theThe modern physicist sees the world in a A similar image appears in the philosophy of Leibniz who considered the world as being made of fundamental substances called ‘monads’, each of which mirrored the whole universe. This led him to a view of matter which shows similarities to that of Mahayana Buddhism and to the bootstrap.* In his Monadology, Leibniz writes : Each portion of matter may be conceived of as a garden full of plants, and as a pond full of fishes. But each branch of the plant, each member of the animal, each drop of humors, is also such a garden or such a It is interesting that the similarity of these lines to the passages of the Avatamsaka mentioned before may stem from an actual Buddhist influence on Leibniz. Joseph has argued that Leibniz was well acquainted with Chinese thought and culture through translations he received from Jesuit monks, and that his philosophy might very well have been inspired by the Neo-Confucian school of Chu Hsi with which he was familiar. This school, however, has one of its roots in Mahayana Buddhism, and in particular in the Avatamsaka (Chinese: school of the Mahayana branch. in fact, mentions the parable of Indra’s net of pearls explicitly in connection with the Leibnizian monads. A more detailed comparison of Leibniz’ notion of ‘mirroring relations’ between monads with the idea of interpenetration in the Mahayana seems to show,. however, that the two are rather different, and that the Buddhist conception of matter comes much closer to the spirit of modern physics than that of Leibniz. The principal difference between the Monadology and the Buddhist view seems to be that the Leibnizian monads are fundamental substances which are seen as the ultimate constituents of matter. Leibniz begins the Monadology with the words, The monad of which we shall here speak is merely *The parallels between Leibniz’ view of matter and the bootstrap have recently been discussed; see C. Gale, ‘Chew’s Monadology’, journal of History of Ideas, vol. 35 (April-June pp. 339-48. a simple substance, which enters into composites; simple, .... that is to say, without parts.’ He goes on to say, ‘And these .......... monads are the true atoms of nature, and, in a word, the ....................Q elements of all Such a ‘fundamentalist’ view is in striking contrast to the bootstrap philosophy, and is also totally different from the view of Mahayana Buddhism which rejects all fundamental entities or substances. Leibniz’ fundamentalist way of thinking is also reflected in his view of forces which he regards as laws ‘imprinted by divine decree’ and essentially different from matter. ‘Forces and activity’, he writes, ‘cannot be states of a merely passive thing like matter.‘” Again, this is contrary to the views of modern physics and of Eastern mysticism. As far as the actual interrelation between the monads is concerned, the main difference to the bootstrap seems to be that monads do not interact with each other; they ‘have no windows’, as Leibniz says, and merely mirror one another. In the bootstrap, on the other hand, as in the Mahayana, the emphasis is on the interaction, or ‘interpenetration’, of all particles. Furthermore, the bootstrap and the Mahayana views of matter are both ‘space-time’ views which see objects as events whose mutual interpenetration can only be understood if one realizes that space and time, too, are interpenetrating. The bootstrap hypothesis is not yet firmly established and the technical difficulties involved in its implementation are considerable. Nevertheless, physicists already speculate about extending the self-consistent approach beyond the description of hadrons. In the present context of S-matrix theory, such an extension is not possible. The framework of the S matrix has been developed specifically to describe the strong interactions and cannot beapplied to the rest of particle physics, the principal reason being that it cannot accommodate the particles which are characteristic of all the other interactions. To enlarge the bootstrap, therefore, a more general framework will have to be found, and in this new framework some of the concepts which are at present accepted without explanation will have to be ‘bootstrapped’; they will have to be derived, that is, from the overall self-consistency. According to Geoffrey Chew, these might include our conception of macroscopic space-time and, perhaps, even that of human consciousness: Carried to its logical extreme, the bootstrap conjecture implies that the existence of consciousness, along with all other aspects of nature, is necessary for self-consistency of the This view, again, is in perfect harmony with the views of the Eastern mystical traditions which have always regarded consciousness as an integral part of the universe. In the Eastern view, human beings, like all other life forms, are parts of an inseparable organic whole. Their intelligence, therefore, implies that the whole, too, is intelligent. Man is seen as the living proof of cosmic intelligence; in us, the universe repeats over and over again its ability to produce forms through which it becomes consciously aware of itself. In modern physics, the question of consciousness has arisen in connection with the observation of atomic phenomena. Quantum theory has made it clear that these phenomena can only be understood as links in a chain of processes, the end of which lies in the consciousness of the human observer.* In the words of Eugene Wigner, ‘It was not possible to formulate the laws of [quantum theory1 in a fully consistent way without reference to The pragmatic formulation of quantum theory used by the scientists in their work does not refer to their consciousness explicitly. Wigner and other physicists have argued, however, that the explicit inclusion of human consciousness may be an essential aspect of future theories of matter. Such a development would open exciting possibilities for a direct interaction between physics and Eastern mysticism. The understanding of one’s consciousness and of its relation to the rest of the universe is the starting point of all mystical experience. The Eastern mystics have explored various modes of consciousness throughout centuries, and the conclusions they have reached are often radically different from the ideas held in the West. If physicists really want to include the nature of human consciousness in their realm of research, a study of Eastern ideas may well provide them with stimulating new viewpoints. 