While these initiatives/scenarios seem at least revolutionary, they fail to be convincingly create solutions for a broader social clusters. Technologies and computational regimes instead tend to compress, reduce and transform complex individuals and their associated communities into late-capitalist [desire-seeker] conforming self-expression machines and their well quantified networks, respectively. Yet, despite the resulting broad homogeneity, when community actions are needed more than ever, it is still unsure if people are able to organize themselves or will most of their network-based efforts rather confirm the status quo? Learning surrenders control to the future, threatening established power. It is vigorously suppressed by all political structures, which replace it with a docilizing and conformist education, reproducing privilege as wisdom. Schools are social devices whose specific function is to incapicitate learning, and universities are employed to legitimate schooling through perpetual reconstitution of global social memory. The old-system achieved its goals by controlling workers bodies, at work and off duty, physically and mentally, through formal contractual and managerial measures that brew an anti-social culture. This culture atomizes workers through an extreme version of corporate biopolitics. The probability of throwing a dozen heads consecutively comes out at a desperate 0.000024, so only one person in four thousand might achieve it on average. However each individual step has a 0.5 probability and a magician with any sense will choose to attack such steps individually rather than go head to head against such formidable odds. I feel that the use of viral vectors for high-yield production of human therapeutic proteins in plants by transient expression provides an attractive alternative to production protocols using standard expression vectors in transgenic or transplastomic plants. I summarise auxin biosynthetic pathways, to provide a different angle for analyzing the mechanisms of plant development. Baby come light me up and pray I'll drive you crazy. Yeah boy I fight for your love, but you're a liar baby, my blood's on fire. Hey guys, hit the button below to follow, like, subscibe. Click the link in the description to enter my giveaway. The incomprehensible city planning. Those disfunctioning physical networks. Overexposure to electromagnetic fields. The teams will gather in the tower. I Anticipate roadblocks. The flying debris flooding public spaces. The offices reused for recreational purposes. There are only disfunctioning transportation system. All of the masked DIY networks. The research continues for a new solution, where new micro-nation can be discovered. The personal time us in pieces of time-shards, with maximum efficiency reached. While time is bleeding into space. Mankind has tested his dreams against the realities of harmony.
