When my eye can no longer explain my ear, physics takes over. Science takes control as soon as the visual collapses. I feel the cognitive dissonance of science that amplifies the perceptual wrench of rhythmic psychedelia. But I am not sweating. I feel that the use of viral vectors for high-yield production of human therapeutic proteins in plants by transient expression provides an attractive alternative to production protocols using standard expression vectors in transgenic or transplastomic plants.I summarise auxin biosynthetic pathways, to provide a different angle for analyzing the mechanisms of plant development. I think it's a great way to make driving more scenic and to absorb some particulate matter pollution. I don't think it will make particularly appealing parks, though maybe folks won't mind as much in an all electric future when it isn't noisy. I think the continued development of peer-to-peer carsharing markets (through software or otherwise), ridesharing and perhaps autonomous vehicles is ultimately a good thing. Every car that is off the road for the personal use of a single individual or family has an exponential effect of reducing congestion and transport times. I think this whole thread is a mess but I can't help but watch because the discourse is great. I bought my first ritual knife in an alley of a Hong Kong night market when I was 14. My 'Solomonic' ring is a gift from MMTP that she got at Tara in Ireland. I have a 120 million year old bivalve fossil picked up in Coober Pedy - a primeval sea that is now a jewel-riddled desert- that is/was used as a Necronomicon pentacle. The ghosts of evolution are haunting the timelines. An omnipresent collective consciousness have to emerge. Severe hostile weather conditions should be expected. There are no standards here. I'm looking into the abyss, and the changes are over. While the resources are infinite resources, finite will is still present. I'm warning you, there are severe geomagnetic storms ahead. Scars of my technocapital past emerge, so be resecured. If and when major structural changes that would prioritise general interest of the world's human layer against that of capital, seem to elude any societal, economic and power relations, what options a community of handful person has got in order to experiment with new forms in organising social hierarchies, mode of production, principle of ownership, allocation of resources to key economic and social processes, and social mode of thinking. In what ways might a speculative artwork, research and practice be understood not as an escapist or individual habit of mind, but as something that is undertaken collectively through distributed and augmented multi-layer experiences and sense making, and most importantly something that has the potential for transformation - leaving behind a blueprint of a [land]scape contributing to a possible future global shift? Diverse groups and entities announce plans to form actual countries or towns based on the liberating technology or principles of non-aggression.
