When my eye can no longer explain my ear, physics takes over. Science takes control as soon as the visual collapses. I feel the cognitive dissonance of science that amplifies the perceptual wrench of rhythmic psychedelia. But I am not sweating. I feel that the use of viral vectors for high-yield production of human therapeutic proteins in plants by transient expression provides an attractive alternative to production protocols using standard expression vectors in transgenic or transplastomic plants.I summarise auxin biosynthetic pathways, to provide a different angle for analyzing the mechanisms of plant development. I think it's a great way to make driving more scenic and to absorb some particulate matter pollution. I don't think it will make particularly appealing parks, though maybe folks won't mind as much in an all electric future when it isn't noisy. I think the continued development of peer-to-peer carsharing markets (through software or otherwise), ridesharing and perhaps autonomous vehicles is ultimately a good thing. Every car that is off the road for the personal use of a single individual or family has an exponential effect of reducing congestion and transport times. I think this whole thread is a mess but I can't help but watch because the discourse is great. I bought my first ritual knife in an alley of a Hong Kong night market when I was 14. My 'Solomonic' ring is a gift from MMTP that she got at Tara in Ireland. I have a 120 million year old bivalve fossil picked up in Coober Pedy - a primeval sea that is now a jewel-riddled desert- that is/was used as a Necronomicon pentacle. I see daunting probabilities often appear for complex tasks like winning in war or business or love from a weak initial position; however all of those steps involved in winning may not actually look so impossible individually. While these initiatives/scenarios seem at least revolutionary, they fail to be convincingly create solutions for a broader social clusters. Technologies and computational regimes instead tend to compress, reduce and transform complex individuals and their associated communities into late-capitalist [desire-seeker] conforming self-expression machines and their well quantified networks, respectively. Yet, despite the resulting broad homogeneity, when community actions are needed more than ever, it is still unsure if people are able to organize themselves or will most of their network-based efforts rather confirm the status quo? Learning surrenders control to the future, threatening established power. It is vigorously suppressed by all political structures, which replace it with a docilizing and conformist education, reproducing privilege as wisdom. Schools are social devices whose specific function is to incapicitate learning, and universities are employed to legitimate schooling through perpetual reconstitution of global social memory. The old-system achieved its goals by controlling workers bodies, at work and off duty, physically and mentally, through formal contractual and managerial measures that brew an anti-social culture. This culture atomizes workers through an extreme version of corporate biopolitics.
