The probability of throwing a dozen heads consecutively comes out at a desperate 0.000024, so only one person in four thousand might achieve it on average. However each individual step has a 0.5 probability and a magician with any sense will choose to attack such steps individually rather than go head to head against such formidable odds. I feel that the use of viral vectors for high-yield production of human therapeutic proteins in plants by transient expression provides an attractive alternative to production protocols using standard expression vectors in transgenic or transplastomic plants. I summarise auxin biosynthetic pathways, to provide a different angle for analyzing the mechanisms of plant development. Baby come light me up and pray I'll drive you crazy. Yeah boy I fight for your love, but you're a liar baby, my blood's on fire. Hey guys, hit the button below to follow, like, subscibe. Click the link in the description to enter my giveaway. The incomprehensible city planning. Those disfunctioning physical networks. Overexposure to electromagnetic fields. The teams will gather in the tower. I Anticipate roadblocks. The flying debris flooding public spaces. The offices reused for recreational purposes. There are only disfunctioning transportation system. All of the masked DIY networks. The research continues for a new solution, where new micro-nation can be discovered. The personal time us in pieces of time-shards, with maximum efficiency reached. While time is bleeding into space. Mankind has tested his dreams against the realities of harmony. The ghosts of evolution are haunting the timelines. An omnipresent collective consciousness have to emerge. Severe hostile weather conditions should be expected. There are no standards here. I'm looking into the abyss, and the changes are over. While the resources are infinite resources, finite will is still present. I'm warning you, there are severe geomagnetic storms ahead. Scars of my technocapital past emerge, so be resecured. If and when major structural changes that would prioritise general interest of the world's human layer against that of capital, seem to elude any societal, economic and power relations, what options a community of handful person has got in order to experiment with new forms in organising social hierarchies, mode of production, principle of ownership, allocation of resources to key economic and social processes, and social mode of thinking. In what ways might a speculative artwork, research and practice be understood not as an escapist or individual habit of mind, but as something that is undertaken collectively through distributed and augmented multi-layer experiences and sense making, and most importantly something that has the potential for transformation - leaving behind a blueprint of a [land]scape contributing to a possible future global shift? Diverse groups and entities announce plans to form actual countries or towns based on the liberating technology or principles of non-aggression.
